http://stackoverflow.com/questions/7086464/maximum-single-sell-profit

Suppose we are given an array of n integers representing stock prices on a single day.
We want to find a pair (buyDay, sellDay), with buyDay ≤ sellDay, such that
if we bought the stock on buyDay and sold it on sellDay, we would maximize our profit.
Clearly there is an O(n2) solution to the algorithm by trying out all possible (buyDay, sellDay)
pairs and taking the best out of all of them. However, is there a better algorithm, perhaps one that runs in O(n) time?


I love this problem. It's a classic interview question and depending on how you think about it,
you'll end up getting better and better solutions. It's certainly possible to do this in better than O(n2) time,
 and I've listed three different ways that you can think about the problem here. Hopefully this answers your question!

First, the divide-and-conquer solution. Let's see if we can solve this by splitting the input in half, solving the problem in
 each subarray, then combining the two together. Turns out we actually can do this, and can do so efficiently! The intuition
 is as follows. If we have a single day, the best option is to buy on that day and then sell it back on the same day for no profit.
 Otherwise, split the array into two halves. If we think about what the optimal answer might be, it must be in one of three places:

The correct buy/sell pair occurs completely within the first half.
The correct buy/sell pair occurs completely within the second half.
The correct buy/sell pair occurs across both halves - we buy in the first half, then sell in the second half.
We can get the values for (1) and (2) by recursively invoking our algorithm on the first and second halves. For option (3), the way to
 make the highest profit would be to buy at the lowest point in the first half and sell in the greatest point in the second half.
 We can find the minimum and maximum values in the two halves by just doing a simple linear scan over the input and finding the two values.
  This then gives us an algorithm with the following recurrence:

T(1) <= O(1)
T(n) <= 2T(n / 2) + O(n)
Using the Master Theorem to solve the recurrence, we find that this runs in O(n lg n) time and will use O(lg n) space for the recursive calls.
 We've just beaten the naive O(n2) solution!

But wait! We can do much better than this. Notice that the only reason we have an O(n) term in our recurrence is that we had to scan the entire
 input trying to find the minimum and maximum values in each half. Since we're already recursively exploring each half, perhaps we can do better
  by having the recursion also hand back the minimum and maximum values stored in each half! In other words, our recursion hands back three things:

The buy and sell times to maximize profit.
The minimum value overall in the range.
The maximum value overall in the range.
These last two values can be computed recursively using a straightforward recursion that we can run at the same time as the recursion to compute (1):

The max and min values of a single-element range are just that element.
The max and min values of a multiple element range can be found by splitting the input in half, finding the max and min values of each half, then
 taking their respective max and min.
If we use this approach, our recurrence relation is now

T(1) <= O(1)
T(n) <= 2T(n / 2) + O(1)
Using the Master Theorem here gives us a runtime of O(n) with O(lg n) space, which is even better than our original solution!

But wait a minute - we can do even better than this! Let's think about solving this problem using dynamic programming. The idea will be to think about
 the problem as follows. Suppose that we knew the answer to the problem after looking at the first k elements. Could we use our knowledge of the (k+1)st
 element, combined with our initial solution, to solve the problem for the first (k+1) elements? If so, we could get a great algorithm going by solving
 the problem for the first element, then the first two, then the first three, etc. until we'd computed it for the first n elements.

Let's think about how to do this. If we have just one element, we already know that it has to be the best buy/sell pair. Now suppose we know the best
 answer for the first k elements and look at the (k+1)st element. Then the only way that this value can create a solution better than what we had for
 the first k elements is if the difference between the smallest of the first k elements and that new element is bigger than the biggest difference
 we've computed so far. So suppose that as we're going across the elements, we keep track of two values - the minimum value we've seen so far, and
 the maximum profit we could make with just the first k elements. Initially, the minimum value we've seen so far is the first element, and the
  maximum profit is zero. When we see a new element, we first update our optimal profit by computing how much we'd make by buying at the lowest
  price seen so far and selling at the current price. If this is better than the optimal value we've computed so far, then we update the optimal
  solution to be this new profit. Next, we update the minimum element seen so far to be the minimum of the current smallest element and the new element.

Since at each step we do only O(1) work and we're visiting each of the n elements exactly once, this takes O(n) time to complete! Moreover, it only
uses O(1) auxiliary storage. This is as good as we've gotten so far!

As an example, on your inputs, here's how this algorithm might run. The numbers in-between each of the values of the array correspond to the values
held by the algorithm at that point. You wouldn't actually store all of these (it would take O(n) memory!), but it's helpful to see the algorithm evolve:

        5        10         4         6        7
min         5         5        4          4         4
best      (5,5)     (5,10)   (5,10)     (5,10)    (5,10)
Answer: (5, 10)

        5        10         4         6        12
min         5         5        4          4         4
best      (5,5)     (5,10)   (5,10)     (5,10)    (4,12)
Answer: (4, 12)

        1       2       3      4      5
min         1       1       1      1      1
best      (1,1)   (1,2)   (1,3)  (1,4)  (1,5)
Answer: (1, 5)

Can we do better now? Unfortunately, not in an asymptotic sense. If we use less than O(n) time, we can't look at all the numbers on large inputs
and thus can't guarantee that we won't miss the optimal answer (we could just "hide" it in the elements we didn't look at). Plus, we can't use any less
than O(1) space. There might be some optimizations to the constant factors hidden in the big-O notation, but otherwise we can't expect to find any radically better options.

Overall, this means that we have the following algorithms:

Naive: O(n2) time, O(1) space.
Divide-and-Conquer: O(n lg n) time, O(lg n) space.
Optimized Divide-and-Conquer: O(n) time, O(lg n) space.
Dynamic programming: O(n) time, O(1) space.
Hope this helps!

